I wonder how our princelyfather 'scaped,
Or whether he be 'scapedaway or no
From Clifford's andNorthumberland's pursuit:
Had he been ta'en, weshould have heard the news;
Had he been slain, weshould have heard the news;
Or had he 'scaped, methinkswe should have heard
The happy tidings of hisgood escape.
How fares my brother? whyis he so sad?
I cannot joy, until I beresolved
Where our right valiantfather is become.
I saw him in the battlerange about;
And watch'd him how hesingled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him inthe thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herdof neat;
Or as a bear, encompass'dround with dogs,
Who having pinch'd a fewand made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof,and bark at him.
So fared our father withhis enemies;
So fled his enemies mywarlike father:
Methinks, 'tis prizeenough to be his son.
See how the morning opesher golden gates,
And takes her farewell ofthe glorious sun!
How well resembles it theprime of youth,
Trimm'd like a younkerprancing to his love!
Dazzle mine eyes, or do Isee three suns?
Three glorious suns, eachone a perfect sun;
Not separated with theracking clouds,
But sever'd in a paleclear-shining sky.
See, see! they join,embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vow'd someleague inviolable:
Now are they but one lamp,one light, one sun.
In this the heaven figuressome event.
'Tis wondrous strange, thelike yet never heard of.
I think it cites us,brother, to the field,
That we, the sons of bravePlantagenet,
Each one already blazingby our meeds,
Should notwithstandingjoin our lights together
And over-shine the earthas this the world.
Whate'er it bodes,henceforward will I bear
Upon my target threefair-shining suns.
Nay, bear three daughters:by your leave I speak it,
You love the breederbetter than the male.
But what art thou, whoseheavy looks foretell
Some dreadful storyhanging on thy tongue?
Ah, one that was a wofullooker-on
When as the noble Duke ofYork was slain,
Your princely father andmy loving lord!
O, speak no more, for Ihave heard too much.
Say how he died, for Iwill hear it all.
Environed he was with manyfoes,
And stood against them, asthe hope of Troy
Against the Greeks thatwould have enter'd Troy.
But Hercules himself mustyield to odds;
And many strokes, thoughwith a little axe,
Hew down and fell thehardest-timber'd oak.
By many hands your fatherwas subdued;
But only slaughter'd bythe ireful arm
Of unrelenting Cliffordand the queen,
Who crown'd the graciousduke in high despite,
Laugh'd in his face; andwhen with grief he wept,
The ruthless queen gavehim to dry his cheeks
A napkin steeped in theharmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, byrough Clifford slain:
And after many scorns,many foul taunts,
They took his head, and onthe gates of York
They set the same; andthere it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle thate'er I view'd.
Sweet Duke of York, ourprop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we haveno staff, no stay.
O Clifford, savageClifford! thou hast slain
The flower of Europe forhis chivalry;
And treacherously hastthou vanquish'd him,
For hand to hand he wouldhave vanquish'd thee.
Now my soul's palace isbecome a prison:
Ah, would she break fromhence, that this my body
Might in the ground beclosed up in rest!
For never henceforth shallI joy again,
Never, O never shall I seemore joy!
I cannot weep; for all mybody's moisture
Scarce serves to quench myfurnace-burning heart:
Nor can my tongue unloadmy heart's great burthen;
For selfsame wind that Ishould speak withal
Is kindling coals thatfires all my breast,
And burns me up with flamesthat tears would quench.
To weep is to make lessthe depth of grief:
Tears then for babes;blows and revenge for me
Richard, I bear thy name;I'll venge thy death,
Or die renowned byattempting it.
His name that valiant dukehath left with thee;
His dukedom and his chairwith me is left.
Nay, if thou be thatprincely eagle's bird,
Show thy descent by gazing'gainst the sun:
For chair and dukedom,throne and kingdom say;
Either that is thine, or elsethou wert not his.
(drums sound)
How now, fair lords! Whatfare? what news abroad?
Great Lord of Warwick, ifwe should recount
Our baleful news, and ateach word's deliverance
Stab poniards in our fleshtill all were told,
The words would add moreanguish than the wounds.
O valiant lord, the Dukeof York is slain!
O Warwick, Warwick! thatPlantagenet,
Which held three dearly ashis soul's redemption,
Is by the stern LordClifford done to death.
Ten days ago I drown'dthese news in tears;
And now, to add moremeasure to your woes,
I come to tell you thingssith then befall'n.
After the bloody fray atWakefield fought,
Where your brave fatherbreathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as theposts could run,
Were brought me of yourloss and his depart.
I, then in London keeperof the king,
Muster'd my soldiers,gather'd flocks of friends,
And very well appointed,as I thought,
March'd toward Saint Alban'sto intercept the queen,
Bearing the king in mybehalf along;
For by my scouts I wasadvertised
That she was coming with afull intent
To dash our late decree inparliament
Touching King Henry's oathand your succession.
Short tale to make, we atSaint Alban's met
Our battles join'd, andboth sides fiercely fought:
But whether 'twas thecoldness of the king,
Who look'd full gently onhis warlike queen,
That robb'd my soldiers oftheir heated spleen;
Or whether 'twas report ofher success;
Or more than common fearof Clifford's rigour,
Who thunders to hiscaptives blood and death,
I cannot judge: but toconclude with truth,
Their weapons like tolightning came and went;
Our soldiers', like thenight-owl's lazy flight,
Or like an idle thresherwith a flail,
Fell gently down, as ifthey struck their friends.
I cheer'd them up withjustice of our cause,
With promise of high payand great rewards:
But all in vain; they hadno heart to fight,
And we in them no hope towin the day;
So that we fled; the kingunto the queen;
My Lord the Duke ofNorfolk and myself,
In haste, post-haste, arecome to join with you:
For in the marches here weheard you were,
Making another head tofight again.
Where is the Duke ofNorfolk, gentle Warwick?
Some six miles off theduke is with the soldiers;
'Twas odds, belike, whenvaliant Warwick fled:
Oft have I heard hispraises in pursuit,
But ne'er till now hisscandal of retire.
Nor now my scandal,Richard, dost thou hear;
For thou shalt know thisstrong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem fromfaint Henry's head,
And wring the awfulsceptre from his fist,
Were he as famous and asbold in war
As he is famed for mildness,peace, and prayer.
I know it well, LordWarwick; blame me not:
'Tis love I bear thyglories makes me speak.
But in this troublous timewhat's to be done?
Shall we go throw away ourcoats of steel,
And wrap our bodies inblack mourning gowns,
Numbering our Ave-Marieswith our beads?
Or shall we on the helmetsof our foes
Tell our devotion withrevengeful arms?
If for the last, say ay,and to it, lords.
Why, therefore Warwickcame to seek you out;
And therefore comes mybrother Montague.
Attend me, lords. Theproud insulting queen,
With Clifford and thehaught Northumberland,
And of their feather manymore proud birds,
Have wrought theeasy-melting king like wax.
He swore consent to yoursuccession,
His oath enrolled in theparliament;
And now to London all thecrew are gone,
To frustrate both his oathand what beside
May make against the houseof Lancaster.
Their power, I think, isthirty thousand strong:
Now, if the help ofNorfolk and myself,
With all the friends thatthou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the lovingWelshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to fiveand twenty thousand,
Why, Via! to London willwe march amain,
And once again cry 'Chargeupon our foes!'
But never once again turnback and fly.
Ay, now methinks I heargreat Warwick speak:
Ne'er may he live to see asunshine day,
That cries 'Retire,' ifWarwick bid him stay.
Lord Warwick, on thyshoulder will I lean;
And when thou fail'st--asGod forbid the hour!--
Must Edward fall, whichperil heaven forfend!
No longer Earl of March,but Duke of York:
The next degree isEngland's royal throne;
For King of England shaltthou be proclaim'd
In every borough as wepass along;
And he that throws not uphis cap for joy
Shall for the fault makeforfeit of his head.
King Edward, George, braveRichard, Montague,
Stay we no longer,dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets,and about our task.
Then, Clifford, were thyheart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown itflinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or togive thee mine.
Then strike up drums: Godand Saint George for us!
(drums sound) (groupscreams) God and St. George!
How now! what news?
The Duke of Norfolk sendsyou word by me,
The queen is coming with apuissant host;
And craves your companyfor speedy counsel.
Why then it sorts, bravewarriors, let's away.
(drums pounding, trumpetblaring)
Welcome, my lord, to thisbrave town of York.
Yonder's the head of thatarch-enemy
That sought to beencompass'd with your crown:
Doth not the object cheeryour heart, my lord?
Ay, as the rocks cheer themthat fear their wreck:
To see this sight, it irksmy very soul.
Withhold revenge, dearGod! 'tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have Iinfringed my vow.
My gracious liege, thistoo much lenity
And harmful pity must belaid aside.
To whom do lions casttheir gentle looks?
Not to the beast thatwould usurp their den.
Whose hand is that theforest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils heryoung before her face.
Who 'scapes the lurkingserpent's mortal sting?
Not he that sets his footupon her back.
The smallest worm willturn being trodden on,
And doves will peck insafeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York doth levelat thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knithis angry brows:
He, but a duke, would havehis son a king,
And raise his issue, likea loving sire;
Thou, being a king, blestwith a goodly son,
Didst yield consent todisinherit him,
Which argued thee a mostunloving father.
Unreasonable creaturesfeed their young;
And though man's face befearful to their eyes,
Yet, in protection oftheir tender ones,
Who hath not seen them,even with those wings
Which sometime they haveused with fearful flight,
Make war with him thatclimb'd unto their nest,
Offer their own lives intheir young's defence?
For shame, my liege, makethem your precedent!
Were it not pity thatthis goodly boy
Should lose his birthrightby his father's fault,
And long hereafter sayunto his child,
'What my great-grandfatherand his grandsire got
My careless father fondlygave away'?
Ah, what a shame werethis! Look on the boy;
And let his manly face,which promiseth
Successful fortune, steelthy melting heart
To hold thine own andleave thine own with him.
Full well hath Cliffordplay'd the orator,
Inferring arguments ofmighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me,didst thou never hear
That things ill-got hadever bad success?
I'll leave my son myvirtuous deeds behind;
And would my father hadleft me no more!
For all the rest is heldat such a rate
As brings a thousand-foldmore care to keep
Than in possession and jotof pleasure.
Ah, cousin York! would thybest friends did know
How it doth grieve me thatthy head stands here!
My lord, cheer up yourspirits: your foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makesyour followers faint.
You promised knighthood toour forward son:
Unsheathe your sword, anddub him presently.
Edward, kneel down.
Edward Plantagenet, arisea knight;
And learn this lesson,draw thy sword in right.
My gracious father, byyour kingly leave,
I'll draw it as apparentto the crown,
And in that quarrel use itto the death.
Why, that is spoken like atoward prince.
Royal commanders, be inreadiness:
For with a band of thirtythousand men comes Warwick,
backing of the Duke of York;
And in the towns, as theydo march along,
Proclaims him king, andmany fly to him:
Darraign your battle, forthey are at hand.
I would your highnesswould depart the field:
The queen hath best successwhen you are absent.
Ay, good my lord, andleave us to our fortune.
Why, that's my fortunetoo; therefore I'll stay.
Be it with resolution thento fight.
My royal father, cheerthese noble lords
And hearten those thatfight in your defence:
Unsheathe your sword, goodfather; cry 'Saint George!'
Now, perjured Henry! wiltthou kneel for grace,
And set thy diadem upon myhead;
Or bide the mortal fortuneof the field?
Go, rate thy minions,proud insulting boy!
Becomes it thee to be thusbold in terms
Before thy sovereign andthy lawful king?
I am his king, and heshould bow his knee;
I was adopted heir by hisconsent:
Since when, his oath isbroke; for, as I hear,
You, that are king, thoughhe do wear the crown,
Have caused him, by newact of parliament,
To blot out me, and puthis own son in.
And reason too:
Who should succeed thefather but the son?
Are you there, butcher? O,I cannot speak!
Ay, crook-back, here Istand to answer thee,
Or any he the proudest ofthy sort.
'Twas you that kill'dyoung Rutland, was it not?
Ay, and old York, and yetnot satisfied.
For God's sake, lords,give signal to the fight.
What say'st thou, Henry,wilt thou yield the crown?
Why, how now, long-tonguedWarwick! dare you speak?
When you and I met atSaint Alban's last,
Your legs did betterservice than your hands.
Then 'twas my turn to flee,and now 'tis thine.
You said so much before,and yet you fled.
'Twas not your valour,Clifford, drove me thence.
No, nor your manhood thatdurst make you stay.
Break off the parley; forscarce I can refrain
The execution of mybig-swoln heart
Upon that Clifford, thatcruel child-killer.
I slew thy father, call'stthou him a child?
Ay, like a dastard and atreacherous coward,
As thou didst kill ourtender brother Rutland;
But ere sunset I'll makethee curse the deed.
Have done with words, mylords, and hear me speak.
Defy them then, or elsehold close thy lips.
I prithee, give no limitsto my tongue:
I am a king, andprivileged to speak.
My liege, the wound thatbred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words;therefore be still.
Then, executioner,unsheathe thy sword:
By him that made us all, Iam resolved
that Clifford's manhoodlies upon his tongue.
Say, Henry, shall I havemy right, or no?
A thousand men have broketheir fasts to-day,
That ne'er shall dine unlessthou yield the crown.
If thou deny, their bloodupon thy head;
For York in justice putshis armour on.
If that be right whichWarwick says is right,
There is no wrong, butevery thing is right.
Whoever got thee, therethy mother stands;
For, well I wot, thou hastthy mother's tongue.
But thou art neither likethy sire nor dam;
But like a foul mis-shapenstigmatic,
Mark'd by the destinies tobe avoided,
As venom toads, orlizards' dreadful stings.
Iron of Naples hid withEnglish gilt,
Whose father bears thetitle of a king,--
As if a channel should becall'd the sea,--
Shamest thou not, knowingwhence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detectthy base-born heart?
A wisp of straw were wortha thousand crowns,
To make this shamelesscallet know herself.
Helen of Greece was fairerfar than thou,
Although thy husband maybe Menelaus;
And ne'er was Agamemnon'sbrother wrong'd
By that false woman, asthis king by thee.
His father revell'd in theheart of France,
And tamed the king, andmade the dauphin stoop;
And had he match'daccording to his state,
He might have kept thatglory to this day;
But when he took a beggarto his bed,
And graced thy poor sirewith his bridal-day,
Even then that sunshinebrew'd a shower for him,
That wash'd his father'sfortunes forth of France,
And heap'd sedition on hiscrown at home.
For what hath broach'dthis tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, ourtitle still had slept;
And we, in pity of thegentle king,
Had slipp'd our claimuntil another age.
But when we saw oursunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bredus no increase,
We set the axe to thyusurping root;
And though the edge hathsomething hit ourselves,
Yet, know thou, since wehave begun to strike,
We'll never leave till wehave hewn thee down,
Or bathed thy growing withour heated bloods.
And, in this resolution, Idefy thee;
Not willing any longerconference,
Since thou deniest thegentle king to speak.
Sound trumpets! let ourbloody colours wave!
And either victory, orelse a grave.
Stay, Edward.
No, wrangling woman, we'llno longer stay:
These words will cost tenthousand lives this day.
(drums sound)
(canons boom)
Forspent with toil, asrunners with a race,
I lay me down a littlewhile to breathe;
For strokes received, andmany blows repaid,
Have robb'd my strong-knitsinews of their strength,
And spite of spite needsmust I rest awhile.
Smile, gentle heaven! orstrike, ungentle death!
For this world frowns, andEdward's sun is clouded.
How now, my lord! whathap? what hope of good?
Our hap is loss, our hopebut sad despair;
Our ranks are broke, andruin follows us:
What counsel give you?whither shall we fly?
Bootless is flight, theyfollow us with wings;
And weak we are and cannotshun pursuit.
Ah, Warwick, why hast thouwithdrawn thyself?
Thy brother's blood thethirsty earth hath drunk,
Broach'd with the steelypoint of Clifford's lance;
And in the very pangs ofdeath he cried,
Like to a dismal clangourheard from far,
'Warwick, revenge! myson, revenge my death!'
So, underneath the bellyof their steeds,
That stain'd their fetlocksin his smoking blood,
The noble Salisbury gaveup the ghost.
Then let the earth bedrunken with our blood:
I'll kill my horse,because I will not fly.
Why stand we likesoft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses, whilesthe foe doth rage;
And look upon, as if thetragedy
Were play'd in jest bycounterfeiting actors?
Here on my knee I vow toGod above,
I'll never pause again,never stand still,
Till either death hathclosed these eyes of mine
Or fortune given memeasure of revenge.
O Warwick, I do bend myknee with thine;
And in this vow do chainmy soul to thine!
And, ere my knee rise fromthe earth's cold face,
I throw my hands, mineeyes, my heart to thee,
Thou setter up and pluckerdown of kings,
Beseeching thee, if withthey will it stands
That to my foes this bodymust be prey,
Yet that thy brazen gatesof heaven may ope,
And give sweet passage tomy sinful soul!
Now, lords, take leaveuntil we meet again,
Where'er it be, in heavenor in earth.
Brother, give me thy hand;and, gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in myweary arms:
Away, away! Once more,sweet lords farewell.
Yet let us all together toour troops,
And give them leave to flythat will not stay;
This may plant courage intheir quailing breasts;
For yet is hope of lifeand victory.
Forslow no longer, make wehence amain.
Clifford! Clifford!
Richard! Richard!
Now, Clifford, I havesingled thee alone:
Suppose this arm is forthe Duke of York,
And this for Rutland; bothbound to revenge,
Wert thou environ'd with abrazen wall.
Now, Richard, I am withthee here alone:
This is the hand thatstabb'd thy father York;
And this the hand thatslew thy brother Rutland;
And here's the heart thattriumphs in their death
And cheers these hands thatslew thy sire and brother
To execute the like uponthyself;
And so, have at thee!
Nay Warwick, single outsome other chase;
For I myself will huntthis wolf to death.
(drums sound. bugles blaring.clanging swords)
This battle fares like tothe morning's war,
When dying clouds contendwith growing light,
What time the shepherd,blowing of his nails,
Can neither call itperfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way,like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide tocombat with the wind;
Now sways it that way,like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by furyof the wind:
Sometime the flood prevails,and then the wind;
Now one the better, thenanother best;
Both tugging to bevictors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror norconquered:
So is the equal poise of thisfell war.
Here on this molehill willI sit me down.
To whom God will, there bethe victory!
For Margaret my queen, andClifford too,
Have chid me from thebattle; swearing both
They prosper best of allwhen I am thence.
Would I were dead! ifGod's good will were so;
For what is in this worldbut grief and woe?
O God! methinks it were ahappy life,
To be no better than ahomely swain;
To sit upon a hill, as Ido now,
To carve out dialsquaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minuteshow they run,
How many make the hourfull complete;
How many hours bring aboutthe day;
How many days will finishup the year;
How many years a mortalman may live.
When this is known, thento divide the times:
So many hours must I tendmy flock;
So many hours must I takemy rest;
So many hours must Icontemplate;
So many hours must I sportmyself;
So many days my ewes havebeen with young;
So many weeks ere the poorfools will ean:
So many years ere I shallshear the fleece:
So minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, and years,
Pass'd over to the endthey were created,
Would bring white hairsunto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this!how sweet! how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn-busha sweeter shade
To shepherds looking ontheir silly sheep,
Than doth a richembroider'd canopy
To kings that fear theirsubjects' treachery?
O, yes, it doth; athousand-fold it doth.
And to conclude, theshepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out ofhis leather bottle.
His wonted sleep under afresh tree's shade,
All which secure andsweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince'sdelicates,
His viands sparkling in agolden cup,
His body couched in acurious bed,
When care, mistrust, andtreason waits on him.
Ill blows the wind thatprofits nobody.
This man, whom hand tohand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with somestore of crowns;
And I, that haply takethem from him now,
May yet ere night yieldboth my life and them
To some man else, as thisdead man doth me.
Who's this?
O God! it is my father's face,
Whom in this conflict Iunwares have kill'd.
O heavy times, begettingsuch events!
From London by the kingwas I press'd forth;
My father, being the Earlof Warwick's man,
Came on the part of York,press'd by his master;
And I, who at his handsreceived my life,
Have by my hands of lifebereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew notwhat I did!
And pardon, father, for Iknew not thee!
My tears shall wipe awaythese bloody marks;
And no more words till theyhave flow'd their fill.
O piteous spectacle! Obloody times!
Whiles lions war andbattle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abidetheir enmity.
Weep, wretched man, I'llaid thee tear for tear;
And let our hearts andeyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears, andbreak o'ercharged with grief.
Thou that so stoutly hastresisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thouhast any gold:
For I have bought it withan hundred blows.
But let me see: is thisour foeman's face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mineonly son!
Ah, boy, if any life beleft in thee,
Throw up thine eye! see,see what showers arise,
Blown with the windytempest of my heart,
Upon thy wounds, that killsmine eye and heart!
O, pity, God, thismiserable age!
What stratagems, how fell,how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous andunnatural,
This deadly quarrel dailydoth beget!
O boy, thy father gavethee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee ofthy life too late!
Woe above woe! grief morethan common grief!
O that my death would staythese ruthful deeds!
O pity, pity, gentleheaven, pity!
The red rose and the whiteare on his face,
The fatal colours of ourstriving houses:
The one his purple bloodright well resembles;
The other his pale cheeks,methinks, presenteth:
Wither one rose, and letthe other flourish;
If you contend, a thousandlives must wither.
How will my mother for afather's death
Take on with me and ne'erbe satisfied!
How will my wife forslaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears andne'er be satisfied!
How will the country forthese woful chances
Misthink the king and notbe satisfied!
Was ever son so rued afather's death?
Was ever father sobemoan'd his son?
Was ever king so grievedfor subjects' woe?
Much is your sorrow; mineten times so much.
I'll bear thee hence,where I may weep my fill.
These arms of mine shallbe thy winding-sheet;
My heart, sweet boy, shallbe thy sepulchre,
For from my heart thineimage ne'er shall go;
My sighing breast shall bethy funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thyfather be,
Even for the loss of thee,having no more,
As Priam was for all hisvaliant sons.
I'll bear thee hence; andlet them fight that will,
For I have murdered whereI should not kill.
Sad-hearted men, muchovergone with care,
Here sits a king morewoful than you are.
Fly, father, fly! for allyour friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like achafed bull:
Away! for death doth holdus in pursuit.
Mount you, my lord; towardsBerwick post amain:
Edward and Richard, like abrace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flyinghare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparklingfor very wrath,
And bloody steel grasp'din their ireful hands,
Are at our backs; andtherefore hence amain.
Away! for vengeance comesalong with them:
Nay, stay not toexpostulate, make speed;
Or else come after: I'llaway before.
Nay, take me with thee,good sweet Exeter:
Not that I fear to stay,but love to go
Whither the queen intends.Forward; away!
Here burns my candle out;ay, here it dies,
Which, whiles it lasted,gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster, I fear thyoverthrow
More than my body'sparting with my soul!
My love and fear gluedmany friends to thee;
And, now I fall, thy toughcommixture melts.
Impairing Henry,strengthening misproud York,
The common people swarmlike summer flies;
And whither fly the gnatsbut to the sun?
And who shines now butHenry's enemies?
O, Henry, hadst thousway'd as kings should do,
Or as thy father and hisfather did,
Giving no ground unto thehouse of York,
They never then had sprunglike summer flies;
I and ten thousand in thisluckless realm
Had left no mourningwidows for our death;
And thou this day hadstkept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherishweeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbersbold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, andcureless are my wounds;
No way to fly, nor strengthto hold out flight:
The foe is merciless, andwill not pity;
For at their hands I havedeserved no pity.
The air hath got into mydeadly wounds,
And much effuse of blooddoth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard,Warwick and the rest;
I stabb'd your fathers'bosoms, split my breast.
Now breathe we, lords: goodfortune bids us pause,
And smooth the frowns ofwar with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue thebloody-minded queen,
That led calm Henry,though he were a king,
No, 'tis impossible heshould escape,
For, though before hisface I speak the words
Your brother Richardmark'd him for the grave:
And wheresoe'er he is,he's surely dead.
(sound of someone's last exhale)
Whose soul is that whichtakes her heavy leave?
A deadly groan, like lifeand death's departing.
See who it is: and, nowthe battle's ended,
If friend or foe, let himbe gently used.
Revoke that doom of mercy,for 'tis Clifford;
Who not contented that helopp'd the branch
In hewing Rutland when hisleaves put forth,
But set his murderingknife unto the root
From whence that tenderspray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princelyfather, Duke of York.
From off the gates of Yorkfetch down the head,
Your father's head, whichClifford placed there;
Instead whereof let thissupply the room:
Measure for measure mustbe answered.
Bring forth that fatalscreech-owl to our house,
That nothing sung butdeath to us and ours:
Now death shall stop hisdismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boding tongueno more shall speak.
I think his understandingis bereft.
Speak, Clifford, dost thouknow who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death o'ershadeshis beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hearsus what we say.
O, would he did! and soperhaps he doth:
'Tis but his policy tocounterfeit,
Because he would avoidsuch bitter taunts
Which in the time of deathhe gave our father.
If so thou think'st, vexhim with eager words.
Clifford, ask mercy andobtain no grace.
Clifford, repent inbootless penitence.
Clifford, devise excusesfor thy faults.
While we devise felltortures for thy faults.
Thou didst love York, andI am son to York.
Thou pitied'st Rutland; Iwill pity thee.
Where's Captain Margaret,to fence you now?
They mock thee, Clifford:swear as thou wast wont.
What, not an oath? nay,then the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot sparehis friends an oath.
I know by that he's dead;and, by my soul,
If this right hand wouldbuy two hour's life,
That I in all despitemight rail at him,
This hand should chop it off,and with it issuing blood
Stifle the villain whoseunstanched thirst
York and young Rutlandcould not satisfy.
Ay, but he's dead: offwith the traitor's head,
And rear it in the placeyour father's stands.
And now to London withtriumphant march,
There to be crownedEngland's royal king:
From whence shall Warwickcut the sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona forthy queen:
So shalt thou sinew boththese lands together;
And, having France thyfriend, thou shalt not dread
The scatter'd foe thathopes to rise again;
For though they cannotgreatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzzto offend thine ears.
First will I see thecoronation;
And then to Brittany I'llcross the sea,
To effect this marriage,so it please my lord.
Even as thou wilt, sweetWarwick, let it be;
For in thy shoulder do Ibuild my seat,
And never will I undertakethe thing
Wherein thy counsel andconsent is wanting.
Richard, I will createthee Duke of Gloucester,
And George, of Clarence:Warwick, as ourself,
Shall do and undo as himpleaseth best.
Let me be Duke of Clarence,George of Gloucester;
For Gloucester's dukedomis too ominous.
Tut, that's a foolishobservation:
Richard, be Duke ofGloucester. Now to London,
To see these honours inpossession.